# Reasoning under uncertainty – Cawsey (1998)

\[Notes from §3.4 of *The Essence of Artificial Intelligence* by Alison Cawsey (1998)\]

§1. Given hypothesis $H$ (eg. patient B is having a heart attack) and symptom $S$ (eg. B has shooting pain up his arm):
- $P(H)$ denotes the probability of $H$ in the absence of any known symptoms – the number of people having a heart attack right now divided by the total number of people currently living.
- $P(H|S)$ denotes the (conditional) probability of $H$ given known symptom $S$ – the probability that B is having a heart attack given that we know he is experiencing shooting pain up his arm.

§2. Conditional probability is defined as follows:

$$P(H|S) = {P(H\wedge S) \over P(S)}$$

§3. In concrete terms, the probability that B is having a heart attack given that we know he is experiencing shooting pain up his arm is: 
- the probability that B is both having a heart attack and experiencing shooting pain up his arm, ie.
  - the number of people who are currently both having a heart attack and experiencing shooting pain up their arm, divided by the number of living people
- divided by
- the probability that B is experiencing shooting pain up his arm, ie.
  - the number of people who are currently experiencing shooting pain up their arm, divided by the number of living people.

§4. Note that it is unlikely that we could have data on the last element here.

----

§5. Rearrange it.

It is more likely that we have probabilities of symptoms given diseases $P(S|H)$, rather than anything else.

the probability that B is experiencing shooting pain up his arm given that we know he is having a heart attack



----

Back up to: [Bayes](index.md) | [Artificial intelligence](../index.md)
